JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Obama delivers his
final State of the Union
address.
His chief of staff talks to
us about what to expect.
Then: A suicide bomber in Turkey
kills 10 foreigners in a popular
tourist spot.
And, finally, a successful
program helping underserved
students prepare for and get
into
college.
ANDREA RUIZ DIAZ, Student: When
you're an immigrant and you're
in America, you're just
focusing on learning the
language, graduating from high
school. You're not really
focusing
on college yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iran picked up 10
U.S. Navy sailors and their two
small boats in the Persian
Gulf today. U.S. officials
reported one boat had mechanical
trouble and ran aground. Iran
said the crews were detained for
trespassing. It happened near
Farsi Island. The Pentagon
said the vessels were moving
between Kuwait and Bahrain at
the time.
Afterward, officials said Iran's
foreign minister assured
Secretary of State John Kerry
that
the sailors and their boats
will be handed over promptly.
The Persian Gulf incident came
as President Obama was putting
the finishing touches on
his last State of the Union
address. He's expected to use
the prime-time speech to talk
about where he sees the country
headed for years to come,
including after he leaves
office.
But House Speaker Paul Ryan and
other Republicans talked up
their own ideas today on what
the
president should say, especially
when it comes to fighting
terrorism.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: While we're not
certainly expecting much new,
there is one thing that we hope
to hear from the president, and
that is a comprehensive
plan to defeat ISIS. Americans
are so anxious right now about
their security, about what's
going on around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the Democratic
side, Washington Senator Patty
Murray acknowledged there's
more work to be done and urged
both parties to pitch in.
SEN. PATTY MURRAY (D),
Washington: Tonight's speech is
going to be about the future of
our great country. And Democrats
are ready to keep working here
in Congress to make sure
that future works for families
and the middle class.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will get a
preview of tonight's address,
and talk to the president's
chief
of staff, after
the news summary.
In the presidential race, Vice
President Joe Biden weighed in
Monday on the Democratic
contest and offered words of
praise for Bernie Sanders. New
polls have the Vermont senator
leading Hillary Clinton in New
Hampshire and moving up closer
to her in Iowa. In a CNN
interview, the vice president
said Sanders has more
credibility on the issue of
income
inequality.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: Bernie is
speaking to a yearning that
is deep and real.
It is relatively new for Hillary
to talk about that. Hillary's
focus has been other things
up to now. And that's been
Bernie's -- no one questions
Bernie's authenticity on those
issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later, the vice
president said that wasn't a
criticism of Clinton. He said
that, as secretary of state, her
focus had rightly been on
foreign policy.
There's been new trouble in
Germany over the wave of
migrants pouring into the
country.
More than 200 anti-immigration
protesters tore through the city
of Leipzig last night.
They carried racist signs and
shouted anti-Muslim slogans.
Dozens of police responded to
the
scene and made arrests after
violence erupted. The rioters
smashed windows and vandalized
several buildings. Earlier, some
2,000 protesters had marched
peacefully.
Japan warned today that it will
send armed vessels to keep
China's Navy away from disputed
islands. The Senkaku Islands, in
the East China Sea, are claimed
by both nations. A
top official in Tokyo says that
Japan means to control the
waters around them.
YOSHIHIDE SUGA, Japanese Chief
Cabinet Secretary (through
translator): This objective was
approved
by the cabinet in May last year,
stating that foreign naval
passage into Japanese seas that
aren't considered nonthreatening
will trigger seaborne policing
action, and will be dealt
with by the self-defense force.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
Philippines' Supreme Court
upheld a security deal with
the U.S. amid rising tensions in
the South China Sea. Manila
hopes that an increased
U.S. military presence will fend
off aggressive Chinese moves
there.
Some 50,000 British
doctors-in-training went on
strike today for the first time
in 40 years.
The 24-hour walkout was
triggered by a contract dispute
with the government-run National
Health
Service. The so-called junior
doctors took to the picket lines
to demand better pay for
working weekends and to warn
against plans to lengthen their
schedules.
MAN: I already work up to 24
hours. Many times, that's
nonstop. And I don't really have
any
set breaks during the day or the
night. But if those protections
are taken away and the
trusts are able to just make us
work for as many hours as they
wish, then, of course,
we are going to be more tired,
and, ultimately, that's going to
affect patients' safety.
JUDY WOODRUFF: About 4,000
operations and outpatient
procedures had to be canceled
due
to the walkout, but the doctors
still provided emergency care.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled 8-1 the
state of Florida's method of
handing out the death penalty is
unconstitutional. Judges in the
state have the final say in
capital cases and can even
impose a death sentence when a
jury decides against it. Today's
decision could mean new appeals
for some of the 390 people on
Florida's death row.
On Wall Street, stocks gained
ground, even as oil prices fell
to near $30 a barrel, and
pulled energy shares lower.
Despite that, the Dow Jones
industrial average gained 117
points to close at 16516. The
Nasdaq rose nearly 48 points,
and the S&P 500 added 15.
And the University of Alabama
celebrated its fourth college
football national championship
since 2009 today. The Crimson
Tide beat Clemson last night
45-40. And per tradition, coach
Nick Saban got a Gatorade shower
from his players. Bet it
probably felt good.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a look back at President Obama's
previous State of the
Union addresses, plus a look
forward to tonight's speech with
the White House chief of staff;
ISIS blamed for a deadly blast
in Turkey; and much more.
Tonight marks another milestone
for President Obama. In a few
hours, he will deliver the
State of the Union address that
will set the tone for his final
year in office.
"NewsHour" political director
Lisa Desjardins has been looking
at what he can do in his
remaining months in office.
LISA DESJARDINS: President Obama
wasted no time kicking off his
2016, just five days
into the new year, with a highly
publicized announcement that
he's going it alone on certain
gun control measures.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: There are actions
within my legal authority
that we can take to help reduce
gun violence and save more
lives, actions that protect
our rights and our kids.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
is well aware his days in office
are numbered, 374, to be
exact. And so are the items he
can tackle in that time. What
kind of meaningful action
could the outgoing leader get
done? That depends who you ask.
JOHN FEEHERY, Republican
Strategist: You look at the
president's biggest
accomplishments,
they all happened in the first
two years of his presidency. And
he's been trying to protect
that legacy ever since.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's John
Feehery, GOP strategist and
former spokesman for House
Speaker Dennis Hastert.
JOHN FEEHERY: I think the
president is really kind of
finished on the legacy front.
His
relevance is diminishing every
day somewhat dramatically,
because he's a lame-duck.
STEPHANIE CUTTER, Former Obama
Deputy Campaign Manager: I don't
think he's considering himself
a lame-duck and still
has a lot to get done.
LISA DESJARDINS: And that's
Stephanie Cutter. She's a
Democratic consultant and a
former
adviser to President Obama.
STEPHANIE CUTTER: There's lots
of talk about this being an
election year, and nothing's
going to get through Congress.
That's probably true, with some
minor exceptions on trade
and maybe criminal justice
reform. But if there's any
president equipped to handle
this
type of situation and still find
ways to make progress, it's
President Obama.
LISA DESJARDINS: With voters
preoccupied with who will be
next the in the Oval Office, the
last year of a president's term
usually isn't the time for major
legacy milestones. For
some presidents, it was enough
time to do some things, like
create national monuments,
like Teddy Roosevelt did with
the Grand Canyon in 1908, or
issue controversial presidential
pardons, like Bill Clinton on
his last day in office, or, in a
crisis:
GEORGE W. BUSH, Former President
of the United States: We're in
the midst of a serious financial
crisis, and the federal
government is responding with
decisive action.
LISA DESJARDINS: Push major
measures, like the Troubled
Asset Relief Program, known as
TARP, the $700 billion package
that some called the bank
bailout.
But like outgoing President
Bush, President Obama faces a
Congress run by strong
opposition.
MAN: This is a 15-minute vote.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
Republican-led House started its
2016 by passing a repeal of
Obama's
signature Affordable Care Act,
sending it to Obama's desk to
force a veto.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: This is the
closest that we have come to
repealing
Obamacare. And now we are
sending that repeal to the
president's desk.
LISA DESJARDINS: It is a kind of
last yearlong duel between the
GOP and Democratic president.
As a result, expect Obama to use
his only solo weapon, his
executive authority, to try
and cement his work on things
like the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
reform bill and climate change.
Again, Feehery:
JOHN FEEHERY: He's going to be
pushing for Dodd-Frank
regulations, which is going to
put more constraints on banks
and make it more difficult for
banks to lend. He's going
to really be pushing on EPA. And
he had this big agreement on
environmental protection
and climate change, and I think
he's going to continue to try
through the regulatory
front to really limit the
emissions on things like coal.
LISA DESJARDINS: Cutter sees
foreign policy as another of
Obama's final year legacy agenda
items. She points to Obama's
decision to reestablish ties
with Cuba, including reopening
the U.S.
Embassy there.
STEPHANIE CUTTER: Cuba is a
significant piece of this
president's legacy. I think the
president,
over the course of the next
year, including potentially even
visiting Cuba, will find
ways to make sure that
those doors stay open.
LISA DESJARDINS: Polls show more
Americans disapprove of Obama's
performance than approve.
And while he's ahead of his
predecessor's numbers at this
point in his second term,
Obama trails the same approval
ratings for Clinton and Reagan.
Going into his final year,
Obama's message to the country
and for his own legacy is his
familiar theme: hope.
BARACK OBAMA: If we make some
good choices now, whoever the
next president is, whoever
is controlling the next
Congress, there's no reason why
we shouldn't own the 21st
century.
LISA DESJARDINS: And the
president has a lot to do in
this speech tonight, but
Democrats
here tell me he's hoping to do
it in a shorter time than usual,
perhaps 50 minutes, less
than the hour or so it
took last year -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, you
have been talking to members up
on the Hill. What are Democrats
saying they expect to hear
from the president tonight?
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrats, Judy
-- it's interesting -- are
saying this is an entirely
different
kind of State of the Union
address. They say it will not be
a wish list of items, not a
whole bunch of policy agenda
proposals, but instead a
sweeping vision.
That's the kind of language
they're using. They say that
this is something that is
forward-looking,
which is different, of course,
for a president who on his way
out. Usually, those presidents
try and recap their
time in office.
All of that aside, there is
something Democrats really want
and need from this speech. They
need this president to try and
talk up what he's done. And
they're focusing on the economy.
They're hoping that, as 2016 and
many of the members here are
facing reelection, comes
up, they want the president to
tout what they say is a strong
performance in the economy
under his tenure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we heard
Paul Ryan, the speaker of the
House, a few minutes ago saying
that he wants to hear what the
president has to say about
fighting terrorism, but you have
been talking to other
Republicans. What are they
telling you they look for?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Republicans say two things. Some
strategists that I talked to
outside of this building
told me that they think there
could be a chance that, as the
president speaks to his vision,
something Democrats want,
Republicans are fine with that
too, because they think his
vision helps them.
They're actually -- one person
told me tonight, Judy, that they
think there might be some
clips from tonight's speech that
they can run in ads showing that
they think this big
government vision, as they see
it, was a failure and is a
failure.
Now, on the other hand, when you
talk the Republicans in this
building, they're also
playing the forward-looking
game. They're saying they want
to talk about their own vision.
They say that South Carolina
Governor Nikki Haley is not
going to give a reaction speech
in the Republican response
tonight. She also, they say,
going nontraditional, and will
instead
present a Republican vision for
the future, the Republican
agenda.
But there's a lot of competing
vision optics here as well,
Judy. Democrats told me that
several of their members, as
many as 20, are bringing Muslim
Americans as their guests.
Now, that's not about President
Obama's agenda. That's clearly
about the 2016 campaign, which
I think will be woven
through this speech.
One last note, Judy. I have
talked to a lot of people about
this speech tonight, but I
have to say the most insightful
might have been my Uber driver
on the way here, a man
named Earl Wiggins (ph), an
Obama fan, he said. He said he
wants to hear the president
really speak from the heart.
He's not sure about the
president himself. He says the
president
has to be genuine and really
speak to what he means.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ah, the
wisdom of real people.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just very
quickly, Lisa, you have been
covering Congress for a while.
Does
it feel different that this is
the last State of the Union?
LISA DESJARDINS: I'm going to be
honest, Judy. It doesn't feel
all that different.
To me, this feels a little bit
like a classic State of the
Union. I
think there's been a bigger
change that could be expressed
in this speech tonight. I think
what is different in Congress at
this moment that I feel is that
now it is about competing
agendas. It's not as much about
the competing politics that we
have seen.
And I think that's being
expressed tonight, as the
president tries to express a
bigger
vision that they say is beyond
politics. Republicans are trying
to do the same. But what's
ironic
there is, of course, that's
kind of politics, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins,
reporting for us from the
Capitol, and we will be talking
to you later tonight. Thanks.
LISA DESJARDINS: You got it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reports have it
that President Obama, White
House speechwriters and his
staff
have spent today tweaking the
State of the Union address.
A short time ago, I spoke with
the White House chief of staff,
Denis McDonough.
Denis McDonough, welcome.
So, we're hearing this is going
to be a different sort of State
of the Union. What does that
mean?
DENIS MCDONOUGH, White House
Chief of Staff: Judy, thanks for
the chance to be with you.
Well, the president -- you won't
hear tonight what is a
traditional list of policy
proposals,
but, rather, you will hear the
president talk through the kind
of challenges that we will
be facing not only in the year
ahead, but really the decade
ahead.
And he wants to make sure that
the institutions of Washington
are focused on those, and are
rolling up our sleeves to get
ready to deal with a changing
economy where everybody needs
to have a shot at opportunity in
this economy, talking about
using all the elements of our
national power to protect the
country and expand our
influence, making sure that we
use technology to advance our
interests, not use that -- not
have that technology used
against us, and then, of course,
talking about how he thinks our
politics could be done much
better than they have been.
And he will make sure that our
politics reflect the greatness
of this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, not putting
forward a list of proposals,
some are interpreting that to
mean he doesn't think he can get
much done this year, especially
with Congress.
DENIS MCDONOUGH: Yes, well,
look, a lot of people said that
to us a year ago. And over
the course of the last year, we
got a deal with Cuba to open up
and establish diplomatic
relations.
We got a budget deal, a tax
deal. We got TPA, which is a
trade negotiating authority. And
then we were able to get the
largest trade agreement in the
history of trade agreements
last year. And then, of course,
we got the climate deal in Paris
at the end of the year,
on top of the budget and on top
of all sorts of reforms and
export financing and other
things.
So, we will let the record speak
for itself. This president has
been, obviously, leading
policy debates for some time and
pushing the quickest recovery in
terms of job growth over
the last two years since back in
the 1990s and the quickest
reduction in the unemployment
rate since well over
three decades ago.
So, not only do we have ideas.
We're implementing them. You
will hear more about that over
the
course of the year.
But, tonight, you will hear
about our challenges, how we're
going to confront them, how
we're
going to draw on the strength of
all the American people to
confront them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned
politics. The Republican
candidates are out there
painting
a pretty negative picture of the
State of the Union. It sounds
like you're saying the
president wants to counter that.
DENIS MCDONOUGH: Well, I think
the president wants to be
factual.
And I think what he sees is an
American people who are -- when
they're working together and
focused on the opportunities,
the sky's the limit for this
country. And I do find myself
-- and I think the speech
tonight will lay this out a
little bit -- puzzled, perplexed
by the fact that these guys --
guys primarily -- want to just
talk down the economy, talk
down the United States.
That's not consistent with
either the situation we find
ourselves in today or the
history
of this great country. So we
will continue to press that
case, and you will hear it
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, given the
fact, Denis McDonough, that
two-thirds of the American
people, give or take, are
telling pollsters they think the
country is off on the wrong
track, what is the president
going to say to change their
mind? What is he going to
say the state of the union is?
DENIS MCDONOUGH: Look, I think
there's no doubt that people
coming -- what we came out
of, that great recession, the
deepest rescission since the
Great Depression that started in
2007-2008, where people saw the
values of their homes wiped out,
people saw their retirements,
all the indicators of stability
for their families really took a
dramatic hit.
So, I don't doubt that people
feel uneasy, and they have every
right to feel uneasy.
Our role, as the leaders in this
country, is to make sure that
we're making opportunities
for all the American people,
that they have the training, the
opportunities for growth,
the new jobs that we have been
talking about. And that's what
we are going to talk about
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there worry at
the White House, finally, Denis
McDonough, that what
the president wants to do this
year could get completely
overwhelmed by, frankly, the
2016 presidential race?
DENIS MCDONOUGH: We don't spend
a lot of time worrying about the
politics or the races.
What we spend a lot of time
worrying about is that this
country is ready for this
changing
and dynamic economy, so people
have opportunities, that we are
focused on the threats to this
country, that we're focused on
the new opportunities,
particularly the clean energy.
So, that's what we will focus
on. What happens on the campaign
trail is not something we
can control, and we're not even
going to try. We have a story to
tell. We have a country
to lead, and this is a great
country. And we're blessed to
have the opportunity to do
it. That's what we're going
to do for the next year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Denis McDonough,
White House chief of staff,
thank you very much for talking
with us.
DENIS MCDONOUGH:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
relief for starving families in
Syria, but how long will it
last?;
a kind of Teach for America
program for college advisers;
and how prison drove a man to
poetry.
But, first, the deadly bombing
that shook Turkey's largest city
today. The suicide blast
killed 10 people, including
eight Germans, and wounded 15.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
has the story.
MARGARET WARNER: It was
mid-morning when the explosion
ripped through the historic
heart
of Istanbul. The site,
Sultanahmet Square, is a major
tourist destination, home to a
landmark obelisk and just steps
from the famed Blue Mosque.
But, today, its grounds were
scattered with bodies, and body
parts, as ambulance sirens
wailed and security forces
rushed to the scene.
MAN (through translator): It was
a suicide bomb. There was chaos.
Everybody was running
somewhere.
MARGARET WARNER: The dead were
all foreigners, nearly all of
them, German tourists.
And Reuters correspondent Ayla
Jean Yackley in Istanbul said
via Skype it's a blow to
Turkey's vital tourist industry.
AYLA JEAN YACKLEY, Reuters:
There is very much a sense of
deep sadness, fear. What does
this mean for Turkey's tourism
business? What does this mean
for Turkey's reputation or
standing in the world? Will
Turkey now be perceived as
another dangerous no-go place
in the region? These are some of
the questions that are on
people's minds here as well.
MARGARET WARNER: Turkish
officials responded quickly,
with the prime minister
declaring
the Islamic State group
was responsible.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister (through translator):
Our fight against ISIS, which
carried out this attack, will
continue with determination. The
perpetrators of this attack
and their links will be unveiled
and they will get the punishment
they deserve.
MARGARET WARNER: Turkey's deputy
prime minister said the
perpetrator was a Syrian
national
born in 1988, that he'd entered
Turkey recently, but wasn't on
the country's watch list of
suspected militants.
Another report said the bomber
was Saudi-born. Turkey's leaders
also spoke by phone to German
Chancellor Angela Merkel, who
later addressed reporters in
Berlin.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through translator): Today, it
hit Istanbul, but,
before that, it was Paris, and,
before that, it was Copenhagen,
Tunisia and so many other
places. International terror
chooses the places of its
attacks in different ways, but
its
target is always the same: our
life in freedom and our free
societies.
MARGARET WARNER: This wouldn't
be the first time that ISIS
targeted Turkey. In July, more
than 30 people were killed in a
suicide attack in Suruc, near
the southeastern border with
Syria. Then, in October, twin
suicide bombs exploded at a
peace rally in Ankara. More
than 100 were killed.
Those attacks were aimed at
Turkish Kurds. Their Syrian
brethren are one of the most
effective forces fighting ISIS
in Syria. But Kurdish
separatists inside Turkey and
their
government are locked in a
vicious new war, after a
two-year cease-fire. Lately,
Turkey
is taking a stronger hand
in Syria against ISIS.
Last year, it agreed to open its
bases to U.S. aircraft and to do
more to stop the flow
of foreign militants into Syria.
AYLA JEAN YACKLEY: Turkey's also
been more and more outspoken in
its criticism of Islamic
State. Maybe initially, there
was some reluctance to call them
terrorists, for example. And
now the government officials,
including the president, do call
them terrorists.
Of course, there's also some
truth to the fact that Turkey
was a very ardent and outspoken
opponent and critic of Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad, which
may have encouraged turning
a blind eye. The idea that
either Turkey, the government,
helped bring this on by not
doing enough or has brought it
on by joining the coalition and
maybe doing too much shows
you the sort of rock and a hard
place that Turkey's caught
between.
MARGARET WARNER: All of that as
Turkey continues to host more
than two million Syrian
refugees.
Just yesterday, Ankara said it
will offer refugees work permits
to discourage them from
illegally crossing into
the European Union.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn to
another consequence of the Syria
war, and a weapon used against
civilians caught in the middle
of that brutal conflict.
We begin with a report from
Lindsey Hilsum of Independent
Television News
LINDSEY HILSUM: It's months
since they ate properly. Are
these tears of hunger or relief?
Because, finally, after night
fell, food arrived, some of it
to eat right now, no waiting.
WOMAN (through translator): The
situation in Madaya is so bad.
Before the siege, we
used to live a proper life, but
when the armed rebels entered
the village and did what they
did, they revealed
their true colors.
LINDSEY HILSUM: It's a delicate
situation for the U.N. and the
Red Cross and Crescent,
who are strictly neutral. They
negotiated for months to get
food and medicine into Madaya,
besieged by the government, and
two villages besieged by the
rebels, relief for tit for
tat starving.
WOMAN (through translator):
People with no electricity are
burning shoes and plastic
bags to stay warm. People are in
the street looking for food in
the rubbish.
LINDSEY HILSUM: This is Madaya
clinic. The few health
professionals left in town were
pleased to get badly need
medicines brought by the convoy.
But aid agencies say up to
400 people should be evacuated
immediately because they have
serious illnesses that need
treatment that's impossible
in these conditions.
WOMAN (through translator): My
son has hepatitis and he has to
leave. I have a medical report
and I want the take him out.
There are neither medicines, nor
doctors. There is nothing.
LINDSEY HILSUM: The convoy
succeeded, but the problem is
not solved, and there are dozens
of besieged places in Syria.
PAWEL KRZYSIEK, International
Committee of the Red Cross:
They're the hardest moments
to see, to listen to those
people, to hear their concerns,
and to realize that, you know,
one-time distribution will not
solve the long-term problem of
the people living in the
besieged
areas, no matter where they are,
in Madaya, Foua and Kefraya,
Deir el-Zour. We just need
to be able to come back and
bring the aid on a regular
basis.
LINDSEY HILSUM: So much ruin.
Government barrel bombs have
destroyed the Damascus suburb of
Zariah (ph), but when they bring
their tanks, the rebels destroy
them.
And in Idlib today, more Russian
airstrikes; 37 people were
reported killed. As long as
this goes on, there will be no
real relief for the besieged
people of Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on the
humanitarian situation in Madaya
and elsewhere in Syria,
we turn to William Brangham.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As we just
heard in Lindsey Hilsum's
report, the United Nations is
moving
aid convoys into the
besieged city of Madaya.
For the very latest on what's
happening there and elsewhere in
Syria, I'm joined via Skype
by Kevin Kennedy, the U.N.'s
regional humanitarian
coordinator for the Syria
crisis. He's monitoring
the situation from
Amman, Jordan.
So, Kevin Kennedy, thank you
very much for being here.
We have seen all of these
terrible images coming out of
Syria. Can you give us the
latest
on what's happening in
the town of Madaya?
KEVIN KENNEDY, U.N. Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator: Well,
as you know, we were able
to deliver after many months of
requests aid to Madaya last
night for the 42,000 people
that are trapped there, and also
to two other towns to the north,
Foua and Kefraya.
And we hope to provide some more
deliveries in the next couple
days here, because what
we were able to do last night
was -- had some of the basic
needs, but much more is required
to meet their
situation in Madaya.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, we
know that Assad's forces have
surrounded these towns,
sometimes
with barbed wire,
sometimes with snipers.
Have you seen any interference
at all with the aid convoys that
are going into these
towns?
KEVIN KENNEDY: There was a delay
last night, but I would not call
it interference (INAUDIBLE)
but basically unimpeded. It took
a while to get there, but they
did get there about 8:00
in the evening and stayed
until 4:00 in the morning.
So, I would say this is just one
town of many that are either
besieged or hard to reach
in Syria. There's about 13.5
million people in need of one
form of humanitarian assistance
or another in Syria. And about
4.5 million of those are in
these hard-to-reach areas
and half of those in
ISIL-controlled areas.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just as you
say, Amnesty International
referred to Madaya really as
just the tip of the iceberg.
So, what are you doing in those
other towns that have been
harder to reach as well?
KEVIN KENNEDY: Well, we continue
to try to reach them. And we do
in some cases, but not
near to the degree
that we should.
The U.N., the Red Cross, Red
Crescent, the NGOs are very
active on the ground in Syria.
In fact, it's quite remarkable,
because of the degree of
activity and assistance that's
delivered in a very
active war zone.
Some six million people are fed
every month, every five non-food
items, eight million people
with clean water, but this is
not meeting the needs that are
there in Syria, particularly
in those areas that are
controlled either by ISIL or
besieged by the armed groups or
by the government.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The United
Nations has passed resolutions
demanding that the Syrian
government
allow these aid convoys in, but
there has been very little
success moving the needle
there. What other levers do you
have to try to get the aid into
the places where it's
needed?
KEVIN KENNEDY: Well, it's not
just the Syrian government,
though that's one part of the
conflict. There's other group as
well, ISIL and other armed
groups that restrict our aid
efforts.
We continue to work with the
government to try to get access.
And we have had some success,
not the degree of success that
we would like. We also deliver
from outside the country,
from Turkey, from Iraq, from
Lebanon and from Jordan as well,
into some of those hard-to-reach
areas and negotiate with the
different armed groups there to
get through.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: My
understanding is that Monday's
delivery and last night's
delivery
really will last for about four
weeks. But what happens when
that food runs out? What
happens then?
KEVIN KENNEDY: We will be going
back to the situation you had
before, and the situation
was quite dire.
It is interesting. A kilo of
wheat was going for $89 in
Madaya until yesterday. That
same
kilo goes for 75 cents in
Damascus, which gives you an
idea of the degree of
deprivation
that the people have suffered.
And, of course, the concern is
not only in Madaya, but these
other locations, and what
conditions are they in?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So there are
some supplies in Madaya, but
people just simply can't afford
to purchase them?
KEVIN KENNEDY: Well, there is
always a black market in any
war, and there is a black market
in this war.
And I guess some things leak
into there, not in any great
quantities, but obviously at
great expense, and really beyond
the reach of most of the people
to buy them. If the
price is 89 times what it should
be, it gives you an idea of the
degree of scarcity and
the degree of how hard it
is to get these supplies.
So, we have about 15 areas in
Syria that we consider besieged,
and another -- and which
contain about 400,000 people,
and another four million people,
if you will, in these
hard-to-reach areas where we get
in intermittently, but not with
the consistency and the
sustained
effort that we need.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some of the
rebel groups have been arguing
that until aid is allowed
in freely into these towns, that
the peace talks that are planned
for the rest of -- for
the end of this month shouldn't
go forward. Do you believe that
that's the right strategy?
KEVIN KENNEDY: You know, we're
calling for immediate, open,
unimpeded and sustained access.
Of course, we have been calling
on this for years. But this is a
good moment to really
put that into play. And I think
all parties in conflict or all
parties going to the peace
conference should abide by this.
Meeting the needs of the people,
wherever they may be,
in whatever area they're under
the control of, is most
important.
And denying people the basic
necessities of life and putting
their lives in danger is
a violation of international
humanitarian law and cannot be
abided by.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Kevin Kennedy of the United
Nations, thank you very much
for joining us.
KEVIN KENNEDY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Final deadlines
for college applications are
looming this week, and students
who are the first in their
family to apply to college are
the least likely to have had
help navigating the
complex process.
A group called the College
Advising Corps is trying to turn
that disparity around. It
partners with high schools and
universities to recruit and pay
recent college grads to
advise lower-income,
first-generation students on
getting into college.
Hari Sreenivasan visited two New
York City high schools working
with the corps.
VICTORIA DEL TORO, College
Advising Corps: You bought two
movie tickets. Your friend
cancels.
What would you do?
STUDENT: I would call
my other friend.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: You would
call somebody else. What happens
if that person doesn't
respond?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Many students
at Manhattan Academy for Arts
and Language all still learning
English. Most of them are recent
immigrants. The idea of applying
and going to college
can feel totally foreign. That's
where Victoria Del Toro comes
in.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: Are you going
to lose out on that money?
STUDENTS: No.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: You call
somebody else. So, colleges work
the same way. So, when they
e-mail you, they track who
responds to what. And they want
to know that you're responsible,
right?
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is her
second full year at the school,
as part of a program called
College Advising Corps.
As the school's only dedicated
college counselor, her mission
is to have all of the school's
nearly 400 students believe
college is an option. It's a
mission that could be
challenging
in most American high schools.
But, at Manhattan Academy, few
have any friends or relatives
who have experience with
American
higher education.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: They still
don't think they're performing
at the level that they
should be performing at. So,
they're very aware that they are
being compared to other
students, and so they know that
the language is a barrier.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrea Ruiz
Diaz came to the U.S. from
Paraguay four years ago. She
was already convinced college
was in her future, but the
details of how to get there were
a
mystery.
ANDREA RUIZ DIAZ, Student: I
wouldn't know about the SATs,
because, when you're an
immigrant
and you're in America, you're
just focusing on learning the
language, graduating from
high school. You're not really
focusing on college yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The type of
help Del Toro provides,
one-on-one help with choosing
schools,
help with writing essays, and
guiding students through
completing paperwork, is what
affluent
families pay hundreds
of dollars for.
Across the country, the average
college counselor works with
more than 450 students a year.
That means the average student
has less than 40 minutes of
individual coaching on college
applications. Without partnering
with College Advising Corps,
principal Siv Boletsis says
her students would be in the
same boat. Instead, Del Toro
tries to spend 20 to 30 minutes
a
week with each student.
How important has that
role been on campus here?
SIV BOLETSIS, Principal,
Manhattan Academy for Arts and
Language: The two guidance
counselors
who are here provide the
socio-emotional support and
programming for the students.
There was
a need for someone like Victoria
to be here to explain certain
things. These are families
who don't know about the college
application process at all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Del Toro says
her hours with students and
parents are chipping away
at skepticism about the
stressful college application
process being worth it.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: My first year
here at Manhattan Academy, it
was definitely not, like, a goal
for a student or even a
conversation for a student to
say, hey, I signed up for the
SAT,
I'm going to take it.
And now, I must say, like, when
I saw my data and I saw that 94
percent of my senior class
registered for the SAT, I said,
things are changing in here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But the goal
is not just to get students to
apply to any college. Aiming
high can make a difference. A
growing body of research
suggests low-income,
first-generation
students who have the grades to
get into selective schools are
more likely to graduate from
those
colleges than from the local,
open-enrollment campuses where
they're still more likely
register.
VICTORIA DEL TORO: I have more
students applying to private
institutions out of the state
than
ever before.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the spring,
Del Toro posts where students
have been accepted and
the scholarships they have won
on bulletin boards, spurring
competition.
Andrea Ruiz Diaz says her ideas
about what's possible have
expanded.
ANDREA RUIZ DIAZ: I definitely
wouldn't have considered
applying to schools out of
state.
Like, I have always had the fear
of going out of my house,
especially because I'm an
immigrant. It feels weird and
scary, but she I'm open to it
now.
AILEEN MONER, College Advising
Corps: There are so many
talented students that don't see
themselves competitive enough.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Aileen Moner
is director of College Advising
Corps' New York office
and oversees two-dozen
counselors working in more than
20 high schools across the city.
AILEEN MONER: I think we're
definitely working with those
students that maybe don't have
the social capital to be able to
see themselves on campuses that
-- that they can really succeed
in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: College
Advising Corps started at the
University of Virginia in 2005.
Today,
it has more than 500 advisers
working in 14 states. The
students they work with are 30
percent more likely to apply to
college and more than 25 percent
more likely to apply
for financial aid.
New York high schools the corps
has worked with over time, like
Eximius College Prep
in the Bronx, are seeing more
students enroll at more
selective four-year colleges.
Jon Daly partnered with the
Advising Corps when he became
principal of Eximius five years
ago.
JON DALY, Principal, Eximius
College Preparatory Academy:
When I first got here, I
couldn't
understand the fact that most of
the students from the South
Bronx here, they were attending
Staten Island College. That's
where they were going.
And I was really wondering, why
is that happening? Because it's
like a two-hour train ride. and
it was because a brother or
sister of some of the students
here went there, and then
it just seemed like that's where
most of the students were going.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Daly says his
goal for every student is the
best college at the best price.
JON DALY: Being an immigrant
myself, and being the first
person in my family to go to
college,
I know firsthand how scary that
process is, and how hard it is
to navigate that. And that's
why I was like, we need somebody
here that can demystify this for
the parents.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That focus has
given the school a reputation as
a promising avenue
from the largely low-income
South Bronx to high-quality
colleges.
JON DALY: We have four years to
get you into the best college.
That's what we will do.
All right?
HARI SREENIVASAN: And the school
is making good on that promise.
Last year, every graduate
was admitted to college. Nine of
those 110 grads are at New York
University this year
with full or substantial
financial aid.
Tiffany Marte is one of those
nine. She says a private
university seemed unrealistic
before
working with her adviser.
TIFFANY MARTE, Student: It was
more of a reach school for me,
and by reach, I mean like
impossible?
Because it was like -- it was my
dream school. Like, it was in
the city. It had all the class
-- all the courses that I wanted
to take, but it wasn't something
that I thought about.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Her classmate
Jeninne Ware was going to skip
filing extra paperwork for
private scholarships. But her
adviser wouldn't let her off the
hook.
JENINNE WARE, Student: The
weekend before it was due, I
completed it, because he texted
me, and he's like, are you --
did you do it? And I'm like, no,
I'm not going to a private
school. So, he really
encouraged me to complete it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Without that
prodding, Ware says she wouldn't
be where she is today.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Hari Sreenivasan in New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last night, we
told the story of a writing
program for juveniles in a
Chicago
detention center.
In part two of his report,
Jeffrey Brown profiles a man who
lost his way and then found it
again,
in prison, through poetry.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS, Poet: All
our thoughts were beginnings.
And you became the roundness
that grew to a moon above
your mother's hips.
JEFFREY BROWN: We first met
Reginald Dwayne Betts in Chicago
at the Cook County Juvenile
Temporary Detention Facility,
where he'd come to read his
poetry to young inmates and
answer
their questions.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: If I
never got caught, do I think --
so you're just going to put
me on the spot like that?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Does it take you
back when you walk in a place
like this?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Mostly
no, because it's really
different walking in from the
side I walk in now. And so the
reason it takes me back is I
recognize how different the
experience
is.
And then, when I see the kids,
though, it takes me back,
because all of them remind
me of me when I was younger.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betts grew up 700
miles to the east in Suitland,
Maryland, a community
southeast of Washington, D.C.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: This is
my first time being back in a
while, yes
JEFFREY BROWN: He was a bright
child, an honor student who
loved to read, and had hopes for
college, despite being
surrounded by drugs, occasional
violence and peers who'd been
locked
up.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I
expected myself to be the
exception, despite the fact that
I
smoked weed, just like everybody
else, and I kind of hung around
out here late at night,
just like everybody else. I
guess I thought I would end up
different.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I thought
I was smart. I thought I was
better. I thought I could
beat the odds, maybe. And I
thought the stuff that I was
doing wasn't that bad anyway.
JEFFREY BROWN: That all changed
on the evening of December 7,
1996, at this mall in
Springfield,
Virginia, when then 16-year-old
Betts and a friend used a gun to
rob a man and steal
his car.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: I
recognized carjacking was wrong
and it was crazy, but, in the
spur
of the moment, I just didn't
think about it at all.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betts was
arrested the very next day. It
was his first run-in with the
law. He was transferred to adult
court and later given a
nine-year sentence.
So, you go to prison, you're a
teenager, and you're among
adults.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Scary?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Yes. I
couldn't go and bring my mom
water late at night if she
wanted water. I didn't have my
own bed to sleep in. So that was
part of being terrified,
is just what it meant for now
being an adult and to be on my
own.
And then the other part of being
terrified, I think, was just
partly prison is a dangerous
and scary place, and you never
know what's going to happen
from, you know, one moment
to the next.
JEFFREY BROWN: Reading became a
comfort, and one day changed his
life altogether when he
was handed a copy of Dudley
Randall's "The Black Poets," an
anthology that would open
his eyes to the
possibilities of poetry.
What did it give you,
being there in prison?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Well, the
poetry gave me ability to access
the world and communicate
my ideas and my feelings
about the world.
And, also, it was my idea of how
to be somebody. Being a poet,
for me, was being somebody.
And it gave me something to
pursue, and I could easily tell
when I was doing it right
by people's response. And, also,
I just really admire poets,
Etheridge Knight, Sonia Sanchez,
Robert Hayden, Amiri Baraka,
Jack Gilbert, Agha Shahid Ali,
just people who I found able
to say something to me about a
world that I didn't know in
verse, and I just aspired
to be able to do that.
JEFFREY BROWN: After getting out
of prison, Betts attended
community college, taught middle
school, and earned his
undergraduate and master's
degrees. And he wrote, a memoir
and two books
of poetry. The latest is titled
"Bastards of the Reagan Era."
The poems, he says, speak of a
generation of black men lost to
drugs, violence and long
prison terms.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: So lost
in terms of maybe not coming up
with a father in the house,
but, more significantly, lost in
a way in which -- almost as if
the larger community
has abandoned you.
You know, we can look around,
and we can look at the
playground. We could go to the
schools
and look at the school system,
and we could ask ourselves what
kind of opportunities were
available for this kid
or that kid or that kid.
"For the City That
Nearly Broke Me."
"No indictment follows Malik's
death, follows smoke running
from a fired pistol. An old
quarrel, crimson against
concrete and the officer's gun
still smoking. Someone says
the people need to stand up,
that the system's a glass house
falling on only a few heads."
When I talk in D.C., a lot of
the poems were written when I
was teaching in Southeast.
I was teaching in Hart Middle
School. And some of the poems
come out of that experience,
just thinking about how
sometimes that it's just
overwhelmingly difficult.
And, in fact, I had more moments
of just heartbreak, I think, and
tragedy teaching than I did in
prison. And so, in those poems,
I think I'm fixating on the
thing that causes me so much
pain, not to the exclusion of
everything else, but to the
point that I really want to have
to confront what it means to
meet somebody that you really
think is brilliant, and know
that it might not pan out
for them the way you want.
JEFFREY BROWN: Betts himself is
now finishing law school at Yale
University. And he's also
an advocate for prison reform,
particularly for the treatment
of juveniles.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: The
question is, do some people have
to get locked up to get to
that certain point where they
can make themselves better in
life?
JEFFREY BROWN: And serves on the
White House Coordinating Council
on Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention.
When it came up when we were
together in Chicago from some of
the young inmates there, in a
sense, was it better for you to
go to prison? You started
reading, you started writing.
Everything that's happened
to you since came from that.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: Yes, so I
guess I tend to push back on
that.
I was fortunate in a lot of
ways. Like, I was safe in
prison, and you can't bank on
being safe in prison. You know,
you could say that prison was
the catalyst for all that,
and I think that that would be
true, but there's also an
argument to be made that, for
that
to happen, a lot of things had
to fall in place in a perfect
way.
I always say that what that
signals is not the benefit of
prison, but what that signals
is the dearth of opportunities
and the dearth of imagination in
the lives of a lot of young
folks, that, really, we have to
rely on things like institutions
to supply the notion that
-- not that you could rise above
your circumstances, but that
your circumstances should
include
something more, that your
circumstances should include
being a writer.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
what is the plan now?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: The
plan now, to be a lawyer.
JEFFREY BROWN: To be a lawyer.
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS:
To be a lawyer.
I want to try to solve big
problems. Somebody told me
yesterday that you don't go to
Yale
Law School to play it safe. And
he said, despite the fact that
you got three felonies, you're
playing with house money, and
you need to make a decision
about what you could do that's
actually ambitious and test the
possibilities of the world. And
can you think of ways to
solve big problems?
JEFFREY BROWN: And writing?
REGINALD DWAYNE BETTS: And
writing, always writing. Writing
is like breathing, so always
writing, always writing.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Suitland,
Maryland, I'm Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: The first part of
Jeffrey Brown's report looks at
a writing program in one of
the nation's largest juvenile
detention facilities. That's on
our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Finally, another installment in
our series of "NewsHour" essays,
a long tradition of
the "NewsHour" that we
have resurrected recently.
Tonight, we hear from Nicholas
Thompson, the editor of "The New
Yorker" magazine's Web
site, NewYorker.com.
We hear a lot these days about
how the Internet, social media,
and our addictive use of our
handheld devices are reducing
our attention spans.
But, in tonight's essay,
Thompson takes a distinctly
different point of view.
NICHOLAS THOMPSON, "The New
Yorker": The word story is a
shortening of the word history
and derives from the work of
Herodotus 2,500 years ago.
He wanted people to understand
the collision between the Greek
and Persian worlds, and
he wanted us to enjoy reading
what he wrote. The opening of
first book describes money,
sex, violence, and kidnapping.
For most of human history,
storytelling helped humans
survive. The societies that
first learned
to write kept better records,
planned their expeditions more
carefully, and described
the faraway lands they
would soon plunder.
Meanwhile, technology enabled
storytelling. Sharing stories is
easier when you can write
them down or when you can print
and bind them. Now, however, as
you may have heard, storytelling
is under threat. The Internet is
shortening our attention spans,
distracting us, quite
possibly muddling the
structures of our brains.
I started writing long magazine
stories about 15 years ago,
right about when one of the
main publishers of long magazine
stories, "Rolling Stone,"
declared it was abandoning
them. "I don't think people have
time to sit down and read," the
editor declared. And that
was before Twitter.
In 2008, Nicholas Carr published
his seminal essay, "Is Google
Making Us Stupid?" People,
he argued, have lost the ability
to read deeply. We can only
skim, bouncing between
hyperlinks,
distracted by beliefs.
He bemoaned the fact that The
New York Times had started to
publish more and more news
summaries. Carr later expanded
his article into a book, making
the same argument, but
more intensely. He called
it "The Shallows."
Since then, you might think, the
argument has been vindicated.
Look at the Internet.
It's plagued by short, shallow
rewrites of gibberish. We buy
books, but we don't read
them. Five years from now,
something will have been
invented that makes tweets seem
long and ponderous.
But, actually, look more
closely. The New York Times did
start publishing additional
news summaries back then, but,
ever since, it has shifted huge
amounts of energy to long-form
journalism. Even the criminals
in this tale, The Huffington
Post and BuzzFeed, have started
doing their own long form work.
"Rolling Stone" is back in it,
for better or worse. "The New
Yorker" continues to run
long stories every week. Likely
the best-read piece in the
history of the magazine's Web
site is a 24,000-word
piece on Scientology.
The editors of longform.org get
classic referrals from the
dating site OkCupid, meaning
that
people are listing their love
of the site on their profiles.
Meanwhile, television has
evolved toward almost endless
and overwhelming complexity. The
shows
that define the '60s, '70s and
'80s, "Cheers," "The Simpsons"
or "Seinfeld," are cream cheese
bagels compared to the full
meals offered by "The Sopranos,"
"Breaking Bad," or "Games
of Thrones." And I should add
that the latter show is, of
course, based upon a series of
books written by George R.R.
Martin that cumulatively run
about 5,000 pages.
So what's happening? Technology
takes our time away, but it also
gives it back. Our
smartphones, our computers, our
connection speeds make it
possible to process and absorb
ever more information. We have
near infinite memories. It's
become easier to write, and
it's become easier to read.
There's something deeply human
about storytelling. It's part of
how we learn language as babies,
and it's part of how we come to
understand our world as adults.
The intelligence of humans
is best thought of as a
combination of ourselves and our
machines.
And looked at this way, you
realize we're becoming smarter
and smarter every day. We
don't have as much free time as
we used to, and the Internet has
created all kinds of
terrible habits. Just try to
avoid checking your e-mail when
this ends.
But complexity surrounds us and
beckons us. It's hard not to
think that Herodotus would
be proud.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Before we go
tonight, in the last few
minutes, the White House has
released
excerpts from tonight's State of
the Union address that the
president will be delivering
to Congress in the coming hours.
The sections made public
highlight a vision for the
future
that includes healing the
current political divide.
Mr. Obama is expected to say --
quote -- "The future we want,
opportunity and security for
our families, a rising standard
of living and a sustainable,
peaceful planet for our
kids, all that is within our
reach. But it will only happen
if we work together. It will
only happen if we fix our
politics" -- end quote.
Join us for the president's
final State of the Union speech
right here on PBS. That's
live beginning at 9:00
p.m. Eastern time.
And, meantime, on the "NewsHour"
online: With the Powerball
jackpot jumping to $1.5 billion,
the largest ever, you may be
thinking it's time to buy a
ticket or two. But, despite
the incredible negative odds,
playing the lottery still
delivers a thrill worth at least
the $2 for a ticket. Our Making
Sense columnist explains how.
You can find his comments on
our home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
But don't forget to stick around
for our live State of the Union.
We will have the president's
full address and the Republican
response, plus analysis with
political observers, including
our very own Mark Shields and
David Brooks. That's starting at
9:00 Eastern. We will see
you then.
I'm Judy Woodruff. We
will be back shortly.